Commentary
What Bitcoin Needs Is a Few Good Regulations
The digital currency—and the tech behind it—is in limbo, as federal agencies make up differing rules.
Photo: Getty Images
Dov Greenbaum
Dec. 14, 2017 6:27 p.m. ET
Bitcoin fever has, in all likelihood, invaded your news feed. Interest in the virtual currency went viral in recent weeks as the price of a bitcoin shot up to $19,000. Many speculators, like those who dived head-first into the internet of the late 1990s, will lose their investments when the bubble bursts. But paradigm-busting technologies like blockchain, the system that underpins bitcoin, will survive. The worry is that this chaos, created in part by inconsistent regulation, will slow real innovation.
Some investors already have been burned: A startup named Confido disappeared last month after taking in about $375,000. The money had been raised via an Initial Coin Offering, essentially an unregulated way of accessing capital outside the standard channels. In an ICO, a company with a blockchain-based business model sells virtual tokens that can be traded or exchanged for the firm’s services. Most ICOs seem to be legitimate, but incidents like Confido will scare skittish investors or, worse, draw impulsive regulation.
Scattered problems notwithstanding, blockchain will upend old ways of doing business. Traditionally, most business transactions between strangers need to be facilitated by trusted third parties. Banks transfer money. Governments keep track of property records. Credit-card companies enable day-to-day payments. Hundreds of millions of people rely on such institutions as they go about their lives. At the same time, these trusted middlemen have profited handsomely, even as they often failed to be trustworthy. To wit, Equifax .
Blockchain overcomes the problem of lack of trust, thereby eliminating the need for middlemen. The concept relies on math and technology that are complex and often unintelligible to the uninitiated. Here, it is sufficient to appreciate only a few elements: A blockchain is effectively an interconnected, distributed ledger. New transactions are added to the chain and then, once cryptographically locked, cannot be altered. The result is a system of records that is secure and auditable but controlled by no central authority. When a bitcoin user wants to transfer funds, that transaction is added to the blockchain and becomes a permanent part of the shared record.
Blockchains can reduce wasteful byproducts of distrust. Rather than paying intermediaries, the technology allows users to do business with each other by trusting in a vast collective to verify transactions. That’s more important than ever, as people buy and sell online with unknowable strangers.
Consider the repercussions if blockchain technology becomes widely adopted: Financially disenfranchised people, those without access to banks or credit cards, will be able to buy and sell online. Information on deeds, titles, professional credentials and even simple identification will be easily obtainable, transparent, reliable and free from error. The costs associated with many transactions will fall as middleman are cut out and cumbersome government regulation is avoided.
Mass use of virtual currencies will reduce the ability of central banks to set and enforce monetary policy. Regulations meant to protect investors will be circumvented by tools such as ICOs. Trust in institutions will continue to fall as millions of people shift to better verification methods via blockchains. Not surprisingly, those same institutions—governments, banks, insurance companies—are already racing to find ways of using blockchain to reduce costs and create efficiencies.
One impediment to this future is that blockchain innovation is far outpacing the rate of necessary regulation. That’s a problem, because until governments figure out a coherent response to this technology, each regulatory agency will tend to move independently and inconsistently.
Virtual currencies like bitcoin are already lingering in a regulatory limbo. The IRS has decided that it will tax bitcoin transactions like property transactions, meaning if you buy a bitcoin and sell it later at a higher price, you owe capital-gains taxes. Bankruptcy courts, too, have treated virtual currencies like property, giving them a lower level of protection than money receives.
Yet the Treasury Department has subjected bitcoin to anti-money-laundering rules, treating it like currency. Adding to the confusion, the Securities and Exchange Commission convinced a federal magistrate judge in 2013 that taking investors’ money to buy bitcoin counts as a security that falls under its jurisdiction. The only regulatory body that doesn’t seem to want a piece of the action is the Federal Reserve. In 2014 Chair            Janet Yellen said that the central bank “simply does not have authority to supervise or regulate bitcoin in any way.”
With a total value of almost $300 billion as of Dec. 13, bitcoin is now the sixth-largest currency in the world. That valuation may not last, but the concerns raised by these regulatory uncertainties will only grow as blockchain is applied in other contexts. What’s needed is an intelligent, coherent national policy to provide certainty for the next wave of blockchain innovations.
Mr. Greenbaum is an intellectual-property lawyer, a professor of molecular biophysics and biochemistry at Yale, and the director of the Zvi Meitar Institute for Legal Implications of Emerging Technologies.
Appeared in the December 15, 2017, print edition.
Most Popular Videos
