64 COMMENTS
If you own bitcoin, congratulations. Its explosive rise this year has earned you the right to gloat. Unfortunately, if you also thought bitcoin, or any cryptocurrency, would one day displace regular money, those prospects have never looked worse.
Ever since an anonymous creator launched bitcoin in 2009, advocates have hoped that cryptocurrencies could do the job of dollars, euros and yen but more efficiently, cheaply and anonymously.
To do so, a cryptocurrency would have to fulfill at least two of the basic functions of money: a stable store of value and a widely used medium of exchange. Bitcoin’s wild ride shows it can’t fulfill either.
Whether bitcoin is a bubble is beside the point. That the question is being asked shows bitcoin can no longer be thought of as a currency. A stock, bond or property deed confers ownership of a stream of future income. From that you can judge the asset’s intrinsic value and thus whether its current price represents a bubble. Currencies aren’t supposed to have any intrinsic value other than the goods or services they can buy some time in the future.
This distinction is now clearly being blurred. The surge in cryptocurrencies, especially via “initial coin offerings,” is uncannily similar to the wave of initial public stock offerings that accompany every equity-market mania. It prompted Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Jay Clayton this week to warn investors against conflating currencies and securities. “Tokens and offerings that incorporate features and marketing efforts that emphasize the potential for profits based on the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others continue to contain the hallmarks of a security,” he said, and must be regulated as such.
The surge in currencies also undermines the argument that a cryptocurrency’s limited issuance—bitcoin’s is capped by design at 21 million coins—protects it from the ravages of inflation-prone governments. As the number of currencies grows, each becomes the digital equivalent of a limited-edition commemorative plate.
The more digital currencies resemble speculative securities, the less suitable they become as a medium of exchange. Consumers hold dollars and businesses accept them because their purchasing power doesn’t change much while waiting to be spent. That plainly isn’t true of bitcoin: It has moved an average of 3% a day since 2012, and on 5% of those days it moved more than 10%. In the same period, gold moved an average of 0.7% a day and the dollar just 0.3% against a basket of currencies. Neither recorded a 10% or greater move. With bitcoin, what should be your safest asset, cash, becomes your riskiest.
Some of the advantages cryptocurrencies have over regular money have proved overhyped. Proponents tout their anonymity: All you need to transact is a public and private key. This is of particular appeal to anyone on the fringes of the law. Yet it was naïve to think law enforcement would stand by as a chunk of the economy disappeared into the digital underground.
Digital currencies acquired from selling drugs or hacking computers, like bundles of wrinkled bank notes, must eventually enter the banking system in order to be spent. The U.S. Treasury has already declared that anti-money-laundering laws and the Bank Secrecy Act apply to digital currency exchanges and banks handling digital currency transactions. The European Union plans to do the same.
In July, Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network hit BTC-e, a digital-currency exchange based in Bulgaria and regulated under the laws of Cyprus, with a $110 million penalty for facilitating “ransomware, computer hacking, identity theft, tax refund fraud schemes, public corruption, and drug trafficking.” Its alleged Russian operator was arrested in Greece.
Related Video
The virtual currency bitcoin continues surging to new highs as a frenzy of investors get in on the action. WSJ's Paul Vigna explains what you need to know, and how to invest should you want to join the mania.
Read More
